docs: Add Clever Cloud deploy documentation page (#1173)
VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog: docs/docs/deploy/clever-cloud.md

---
sidebar_position: 4
title: 💎 Clever Cloud
---

# Clever Cloud 💎

> [Clever Cloud](https://www.clever-cloud.com/) is a PaaS provider that allows you to start apps quickly using `git` while they manage the infrastructure, the scalability and the run lifetime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Clever Cloud](https://www.clever-cloud.com/) is a PaaS provider that enables you to start apps quickly using `git` while they manage the infrastructure, scalability, and run lifetime.
```

## Prerequisites

Before you get started, if you don't already have these, you'll need to create:

- A [Clever Cloud Account](https://api.clever-cloud.com/v2/sessions/signup)
- Add billing information

:::caution

> As any PaaS service you might need to check the price before going on. Clever Cloud has a transparent pricing policy depending on the runtime type and size, see the [Clever Cloud Pricing Page](https://www.clever-cloud.com/pricing/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As with any PaaS service you should check the pricing before continuing. Clever Cloud has a transparent pricing policy depending on the runtime type and size, see the [Clever Cloud Pricing Page](https://www.clever-cloud.com/pricing/).
```

:::

You might be able to do everything in the console, but for this tutorial, we will use the [Clever Cloud CLI](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/reference/clever-tools/getting_started/), so you'll have to install it on your computer.

Then log in running:

```bash

> clever  login

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
clever login
```

```

## Deploying

> ### 1. Create the Clever Cloud application

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create the Clever Cloud application
```

The other deployment documentations don't use the "###" header. Can you edit these headers to be consistent with the styling used in the other deployment documentations?

Author: Of course I can.
But I find it harder to follow, here are some screenshots with or without

For the index 

<img width="174" alt="Screenshot 2024-01-11 at 22 01 27" src="https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/assets/2990298/367ea1e2-c38c-4357-bbd7-b70944d7594c">
<img width="236" alt="Screenshot 2024-01-11 at 22 01 56" src="https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/assets/2990298/fb23a254-cfb9-4501-aad9-bbd484637d46">

And the content itself

<img width="382" alt="Screenshot 2024-01-11 at 22 01 35" src="https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/assets/2990298/12d9d4b3-8621-4246-bf3d-9197a359d80c">
<img width="511" alt="Screenshot 2024-01-11 at 22 02 02" src="https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/assets/2990298/640c119b-240f-4f80-a57c-384fa6370297">

As you wish, I understand the argument to make it look consistent, but maybe it can be done updating the other deployment documents ? (I can make another PR for this)

Reviewer 3: I agree, the list view looks better. If you can update the other deployment documentation in a separate Pull Request that would be wonderful. What do you think about this @wolfenrain ?

Author: Of course ! 
It's up to you, if we keep on the `###` for the titles I'll change the `Congratulations` t `Enjoy your API in Clever Cloud` and make another PR for the other sections with pleasure to make it consistent

Reviewer 2: I would love to have such an extra overview! That does make it more readable!

Author: Let's do this so. I'll update the title of this PR from `Congratulations` to `Enjoy your API in Clever Cloud` and make another one for consistency on the other pages.

Author: Up to date

Reviewer 3: Thank you @quentin7b ! You 🪨 !

> _Clever Cloud_ has [many available runtime](https://www.clever-cloud.com/product/) that are optimized for the type of application you want to deploy. Unfortunately, **dart** is **not** _yet_ one of them.

Reviewer 3: Is there a source of information (website, Github issue, etc) where users can refer to to see the progress of Clever Cloud supporting Dart?

> _Clever Cloud_ has [many available runtime](https://www.clever-cloud.com/product/) that are optimized for the type of application you want to deploy. Unfortunately, **dart** is **not** _yet_ one of them.

Reviewer 3: Is there a source of information (website, Github issue, etc) where users can refer to to see the progress of Clever Cloud supporting Dart?

> _Clever Cloud_ has [many available runtime](https://www.clever-cloud.com/product/) that are optimized for the type of application you want to deploy. Unfortunately, **dart** is **not** _yet_ one of them.

Author: Unfortunatly no...

> _Clever Cloud_ has [many available runtime](https://www.clever-cloud.com/product/) that are optimized for the type of application you want to deploy. Unfortunately, **dart** is **not** _yet_ one of them.

Reviewer 3: Is there any repository where we could open an issue to track so?

> _Clever Cloud_ has [many available runtime](https://www.clever-cloud.com/product/) that are optimized for the type of application you want to deploy. Unfortunately, **dart** is **not** _yet_ one of them.

Author: AFAIK there isn't.
They appear to have [a github](https://github.com/orgs/CleverCloud/repositories?type=all) but none of them aim to do so.

In order to deploy those type of applications, there is a [_Docker_ runtime](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/deploy/application/docker/docker/) available, and we will this one.

> So first thing first, lets create a _Docker_ runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, first things first, lets create a _Docker_ runtime
```

:::tip
Make sure you are at the root of your project and not in `build`, as this command will produce a `.clever.json` file in the current folder.
:::

```bash
clever create --type docker <app-name> --region <zone> --org <org>
```

> For example, if my project's name is _api_ and I want it to be [deployed in _Paris_](https://www.clever-cloud.com/blog/features/2020/11/05/ovh-clever-cloud-zones/) I will run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if the project's name is _api_ and you want it to be [deployed in _Paris_](https://www.clever-cloud.com/blog/features/2020/11/05/ovh-clever-cloud-zones/), you can run:
```

```bash
clever create --type docker api --region par
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

The `<org>` argument is optional if you only have one Clever Cloud organization.
```

:::note
You can choose the region you want looking at the [available zones](https://www.clever-cloud.com/blog/features/2020/11/05/ovh-clever-cloud-zones/).

> In `<org>` you can specify the id of your organization.
> You'll find it in the [console](https://console.clever-cloud.com/). If you only have one organization, you can skip this parameter.
> :::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:::
```

As a result, you should have `Your application has been successfully created!`

> And if you look in your project's file, you'll find a `.clever.json` file containing something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you check your project's file, you'll find a `.clever.json` file containing something like this:
```

```json
{
  "apps": [
    {
      "app_id": "app_<some_id>",
      "org_id": "<org>",
      "deploy_url": "https://<some_src>.services.clever-cloud.com/app_<some_id>.git",
      "name": "<app-name>",
      "alias": "<app-name>"
    }
  ]
}
```

:::note

> Note you **can** add this file to your git repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You **can** add this file to your git repository.
```

:::

:::tip

> By default, our runtime is scaled to **XS**, which is 1 CPU / 1Gio RAM, if you want less for the tests you can scale it down using.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the runtime is scaled to **XS**, which is 1 CPU / 1Gio RAM, if you want to scale it down for testing purposes you can use the following:
```

```bash
clever scale --flavor nano
```

Giving the output `App rescaled successfully`
:::

### 2. Deploy your API to Clever Cloud

> As it works with `git` we do not send our binaries to them, the deployment on Clever Cloud is therefore in two steps

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As Clever Cloud uses `git` we don't have to compile binaries and share them, Clever Cloud handles that for us, making the deployment steps as followed:
```

    (0. send the sources)
    1. build the app
    2. run the app

:::note

> _Clever Cloud_ listen for `8080` and this is great because dart_frog's is listening on 8080 to, so there is nothing to do with that, it will work out of the box.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Clever Cloud_ listens on port `8080` by default which is also Dart Frog's default port, it works out of the box!
```

:::

In order to tell _Clever Cloud_ how to build our project, we will need to create a `Dockerfile`, because the one created by `dart_frog build` is a built item and not sent to _Clever Cloud_ with _git_.

Here is the `Dockerfile` you can add at the root of your project.

```docker
# This stage will compile sources to get the build folder
FROM dart:stable AS build

# Install the dart_frog cli from pub.dev
RUN dart pub global activate dart_frog_cli

# Set the working directory
WORKDIR /app

# Copy Dependencies in our working directory
COPY pubspec.* /app/
COPY routes /app/routes
# Uncomment the following line if you are serving static files.
# COPY --from=build public /app/public

> ##### Add all of your custom directories here, for example if you have a "models" directory
> ##### Add a line like this :
> # COPY models /app/models

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Add all of your custom directories here, for example if you have a "models" directory:
# COPY models /app/models
```

# Get dependencies
RUN dart pub get

# 📦 Create a production build
RUN dart_frog build

# Compile the server to get the executable
RUN dart compile exe /app/build/bin/server.dart -o /app/build/bin/server

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> # This stage build minimal serving image from AOT-compiled `/server` and required system
> # libraries and configuration files stored in `/runtime/` from the build stage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Build minimal serving image from AOT-compiled `/server` and required system
# libraries and configuration files stored in `/runtime/` from the build stage.
```

[Source](https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/blob/ac4cbf98ae1687c20d5bc13a49e6f6f4a1a8a833/bricks/dart_frog_prod_server/__brick__/build/%7B%7B%23addDockerfile%7D%7DDockerfile%7B%7B/addDockerfile%7D%7D#L30C1-L31C80)

FROM scratch

COPY --from=build /runtime/ /
COPY --from=build /app/build/bin/server /app/bin/server
# Uncomment the following line if you are serving static files.
# COPY --from=build /app/build/public /public/

# Expose the server port (useful for binding)
EXPOSE 8080

# Run the server
CMD ["/app/bin/server"]
```

:::tip

> If you already have a `Dockerfile` you can rename it and specify to _Clever Cloud_ that the docker file to run is not `Dockerfile` using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you already have a `Dockerfile` you can rename it and specify to _Clever Cloud_ that the docker file to run is not `Dockerfile`:
```

```bash
clever env set CC_DOCKERFILE <the  name of your file>
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

:::

> Add the newly created `Dockerfile` to `git` via `git add Dockerfile`, commit and then run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the newly created `Dockerfile` to `git` via `git add Dockerfile`, commit and then run:
```

```bash
clever deploy
```

Your **source code** will be sent to Clever Cloud.

:::warning
Consider Clever Cloud like a new origin and clever deploy a git push.

> :::

Reviewer 2: Not sure what you mean with this?

Author: Its from a *git* point of view and I meant to say remote I'll edit this 
```suggestion
:::warning
Consider Clever Cloud like a new [remote (from a git point of view)](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Working-with-Remotes) and clever deploy a git push.
:::
```

Reviewer 2: Lgtm!
